---
id: "Introduction To Elixir"
aliases:
  - "Introduction To Elixir"
tags: ["elixir", "programming"]
---
## What is Elixir?
Elixir is often described as a functional programming language that is designed for building scalable and maintainable applications. It is known for its concurrency model and fault-tolerant features, which make it particularly suitable for developing distributed and resilient systems.
It is built on top of an existing language known as [Erlang.](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erlang_(programming_language>) We won't be covering much Erlang in this guide, instead we will focus on Elixir which has lots of niceties built-in. A great resource for learning more about Erlang and the foundational philosophies of Elixir is [learnyousomeerlang.com.](<https://learnyousomeerlang.com/content>)

### Installing Elixir
Installing Elixir is a simple process on most operating systems. Use [Installing Elixir - The Elixir programming language](<https://elixir-lang.org/install.html>) to find step-by-step instructions.

To know your Elixir installation is working, use `mix` in your terminal to check that you have the most important tool for your Elixir workflow.

## Why Elixir?
This is a valid question and whether Elixir is right for you will depend on your goals.

For a real-world example, let's pretend you're using a Discord bot. You could design the bot's components as separate processes that communicate asynchronously, allowing for efficient handling of incoming messages, commands, and responses. Elixir's fault-tolerant nature would ensure that even if one part of the bot encounters an issue, it won't necessarily bring down the entire application. This could lead to a more responsive and reliable Discord bot experience, capable of handling a large number of users and messages with ease.

This example scales to massive APIs just as easily.

## Is Elixir Hard?
Nope! If you're familiar with Python or Ruby, Elixir will be a breath of fresh air. The syntax is most similar to Ruby and once you're familiar with pattern matching and functional programming the language itself has a very low barrier to entry.

## Hello, World!
As per convention, you must write a "Hello, World!" program before you go any further. To keep it short, we'll use the `iex` "interactive Elixir shell" for this.

1. Open a terminal
2. Run `iex`
3. Run `IO.puts("Hello, World!")`
4. Press Ctrl+C twice to break out of the shell

Contrats! Let's move on.