## History

The term "engram" was coined by memory researcher [Richard Semon](/wiki/Richard_Semon "Richard Semon") in reference to the physical substrate of memory in the organism. Semon warned, however: "In animals, during the evolutionary process, one organic system—the nervous system—has become specialised for the reception and transmission of stimuli. No monopoly of this function by the nervous system, however, can be deduced from this specialisation, not even in its highest state of evolution, as in Man."[[4]](#cite_note-4) One of the first ventures on identifying the location of a memory in the brain was undertaken by [Karl S. Lashley](/wiki/Karl_S._Lashley "Karl S. Lashley") who removed portions of the brain in rodents. In Lashley's experiments, rats were trained to run through a maze and then tissue was removed from their [cerebral cortex](/wiki/Cerebral_cortex "Cerebral cortex"). Increasing the amount of tissue removed increased the degradation of memory, but more remarkably, _where_ the tissue was removed from made no difference. His search thus proved unsuccessful, and his conclusion – that memory is diffusely distributed in the brain – became widely influential.[[5]](#cite_note-:0-5) However, today we appreciate that memory is not completely but only _largely_ distributed in the brain; this, together with its dynamic nature makes engrams challenging to identify using traditional scientific methods.[[5]](#cite_note-:0-5)[[6]](#cite_note-bruce-6)

Later, [David A. McCormick](/wiki/David_A._McCormick "David A. McCormick") and [Richard F. Thompson](/wiki/Richard_F._Thompson "Richard F. Thompson") sought the engram in the [cerebellum](/wiki/Cerebellum "Cerebellum"), rather than the cerebral cortex. They used [classical conditioning](/wiki/Classical_conditioning "Classical conditioning") of the eyelid response in rabbits in search of the engram. They puffed air upon the cornea of the eye and paired it with a tone. After a number of experiences associating it with a tone, the rabbits became conditioned to blink when they heard the tone even without a puff. One region that David A. McCormick studied was the [lateral interpositus nucleus](/wiki/Nucleus_interpositus "Nucleus interpositus") (LIP). He found that recordings of neurons in this nucleus revealed activity that mirrored the learning, stimulation of the nucleus elicited the learned response, and lesion of this brain region abolished the response.[[7]](#cite_note-7) Other members of the Thompson group found that when the interpositus nucleus was deactivated chemically, the conditioned response disappeared; when re-activated, they responded again, demonstrating that the LIP is a key element of the engram for this response.[[8]](#cite_note-8) This approach, targeting the cerebellum, though successful, examines only basic, automatic responses, which virtually all animals possess. However, engrams of specific types of memory are found in the subsystems mediating that learning process and as such solely engrams of simple conditioning are associated with the LIP but not, for instance, engrams of [semantic memory](/wiki/Semantic_memory "Semantic memory").