## 4. Integrating the multiscale free energy formulation with Tinbergen's four questions

In the sciences of life, mind, and society, using free energy minimisation—realised by nested Markov blankets—enables us to explain dynamics both at and between nested scale spaces. However, although the FEP supplies a powerful, mechanistic theory that captures biological dynamics across spatial and temporal scales, it can only offer partial insight into the particular features of a given species, which instantiate distinct, embodied models of specific adaptive needs and environmental niches [[34]](#br0340), [[67]](#br0670), [[68]](#br0680). In his treatment of Darwinian dynamics, Ao [[5]](#br0050) describes how a complete explanation for any biological system requires two types of laws: those that account for the structure of evolutionary dynamics (e.g., natural selection); and those that can explain the structure of each dynamical component (e.g., genes). We suggest here that the FEP is analogous to the first type of law—it describes, formally, the (entropy bounding) dynamics of all living systems. But what of the second type? Although it is highly generalizable, the explanatory scope of the FEP is limited—it only imposes relatively modest constraints on the classes of dynamical patterns (i.e., complex adaptive systems) that count as living. The FEP therefore requires a complementary evolutionary (i.e., ultimate) account that explains the specific adaptive solutions responsible for producing different embodied models, along with the proximate processes that produce every phenotype. Again, this appeals to the importance of timescales when describing the dynamic ways in which living systems minimise free energy across space and time.

Fortunately, the importance of temporal scales has long been recognised in biology, particularly after Tinbergen [[69]](#br0690) proposed his four key levels of biological explanation (i.e., adaptation, phylogeny, ontogeny, and mechanism). Given the success of this explanatory framework in biology, we suggest that Tinbergen's levels of inquiry might be apt to elucidate structural laws that supplement the general principles provided by the FEP. Clearly, Tinbergen's ‘four questions’ have a long history of producing detailed explanations for the evolution, development, form and function of different species, and by focusing on different temporal scales (ranging from a species' evolution to an organism's behaviour in real-time), they allow us to capture the complexities of every corresponding spatial scale (from sub-atomic particles, atoms, and cells, all the way up). Conversely, the FEP furnishes a biologically plausible EST that applies both to ultimate and proximate processes, supplying a universal principle that intersects all four of Tinbergen's levels of inquiry. We believe, then, that these two paradigms are highly commensurate—the FEP describes a biological imperative to model the world that constrains the dynamics of all living systems (at any time-scale), while Tinbergen has offered a distinctive but complementary framework that allows us to develop substantive explanations for the phenotypic traits and behaviours of any given species or organism. Accordingly, the variational neuroethology proposed here hinges on their synthesis. To exemplify this approach, we turn now to its recent application to the world's most complex living system—us.
