### 2.2. Free energy, surprise, and Markov blankets

To understand the subtle but important difference between surprise and free energy, we have to look more carefully at what constitutes a system. Clearly, one needs to differentiate between the system and its environment—those states that constitute or are intrinsic to the system and those that are not. To do this, we have to introduce a third set of states that separates internal from external states. This is known as a Markov blanket. Markov blankets establish a conditional independence between internal and external states that renders the inside open to the outside, but only in a conditional sense (i.e., the internal states only ‘see’ the external states through the ‘veil’ of the Markov blanket; [[32]](#br0320), [[42]](#br0420)). The Markov blanket can be further divided into ‘sensory’ and ‘active’ states that are distinguished in the following way: internal states cannot influence sensory states, while external states cannot influence active states [[43]](#br0430). With these conditional independencies in place, we now have a well-defined (statistical) separation between the internal and external states of any system. A Markov blanket can be thought of as the surface of a cell, the states of our sensory epithelia, or carefully chosen nodes of the World Wide Web surrounding a particular province.

With Markov blankets in mind, it is fairly straightforward to show that the internal states must—by virtue of minimising surprise—encode a probability distribution over the external states; namely, the causes of sensory impressions on the Markov blanket. This brings us back to free energy. Free energy is a functional (i.e., the function of a function) that describes the probability distribution encoded by the internal states of the Markov blanket. Note that this is different from surprise, which is a function of the states of the Markov blanket itself. In other words, free energy is a function of probabilistic beliefs, encoded by internal states about external states (i.e., expectations about the probable causes of sensory input). When these beliefs are equal to the posterior probability over external states, free energy becomes equivalent to surprise. Otherwise, it is always slightly greater than (i.e., imposes an upper bound on) surprise. This means that living systems can be characterised as minimising variational free energy, and therefore surprise, where the minimisation of variational free energy entails the optimisation of beliefs about things beyond or behind the Markov blanket (see Box 2). This inferential aspect leads us to notions like embodied inference [[44]](#br0440), [[45]](#br0450), the Bayesian brain [[46]](#br0460), the Bayesian cell [[27]](#br0270), and even a Bayesian culture [[29]](#br0290), [[47]](#br0470).

In short, then, how do Markov blankets relate to the FEP? The FEP tells us how the quantities that define Markov blankets change as the system moves towards its variational free energy minimum (following Hamilton's principle of least action; see [Fig. 1](/pmc/articles/PMC5857288/figure/fg0010/) and Box 2). It asserts that for a system to resist entropic erosion and maintain itself in a bounded set of states (i.e., to possess a generalised homeostasis), it must instantiate a causal, statistical model of its eco-niche relation [[26]](#br0260), [[32]](#br0320), [[48]](#br0480), [[49]](#br0490). In other words, an organism does not just encode a model of the world, it _is_ a model of the world—a physical transcription of causal regularities in its eco-niche that has been sculpted by reciprocal interactions between self-organisation and selection over time. On the basis of these distinctions, we turn next to defining a fully generalizable ontology for biological systems based on a multiscale free energy formulation, which we call ‘variational neuroethology’.

[Go to:](# "Go to other sections in this page")