### 3.2. Multiscale integration and variational neuroethology

Above, we suggested that living systems can be described in terms of hierarchically nested Markov blankets. The hierarchical interdependencies between Markov blankets provide a context for biological phenomena at every scale, which implies that the preservation of Markov blankets at a lower scale are necessary for the ongoing conditional independencies that form the basis of Markov blankets at a higher scale, and vice-versa (see [Fig. 3](/pmc/articles/PMC5857288/figure/fg0030/) and Box 3). Put simply, the existence of every level depends upon every other level. Of particular interest here, however, is the importance of the different temporal scales that transcend spatial scales. Strictly speaking, free energy is only ever minimised diachronically—that is, over some discrete time span—as a process [[53]](#br0530). After all, the FEP is a formulation of the constraints imposed on system dynamics: it tells us about the dynamics of living systems that obtain precisely because of what it means for physical systems to be alive [[43]](#br0430).

The hierarchical free energy formulation we propose here encompasses the ways in which the FEP applies to each hierarchical level of organisation by articulating the minimisation of free energy across scales. Any system's operation or functioning (i.e., a particular, time extensive event in our ontology) can be seen as unfolding across spatial scales, driven by temporally integrated free energy minimisation dynamics. Because the time average of free energy is a Hamiltonian action, all we are saying here is that Hamilton's principle of least action (perhaps the most celebrated variational principle) is realised by hierarchically nested biophysical processes. Having said this, the assertion that the time average of free energy is a Hamiltonian action is non-trivial for general stochastic dynamics, and is still a subject of research, i.e., [[54]](#br0540). Over any given time lapse, free energy minimisation can thus be framed as a hierarchical ‘unpacking’, across spatial scales, of the same invariant (or scale-free) dynamics. Since spatial and temporal scales are intrinsically correlated (i.e., events unfolding over long distances usually take more time to unfold [[55]](#br0550), [[56]](#br0560), [[57]](#br0570), what we have is a scale space that is populated mostly along its diagonal (see [Fig. 2](/pmc/articles/PMC5857288/figure/fg0020/)).

Framing things in this way allows us to derive a computationally tractable, dynamical typology of the scientifically relevant events (types of biotic systems) at each timescale, and also to distinguish between different regions in the biophysical phase space, which roughly correspond with the ontologies of scientific disciplines concerned with different living systems (e.g., biology, psychology and the social sciences; [[58]](#br0580)). These self-organising, variational imperatives remain identical at each level of organisation, but differ fundamentally in how they are mediated. For example, the brain uses some form of belief propagation or predictive coding to maintain its Markov blanket [[59]](#br0590), [[60]](#br0600), [[61]](#br0610), while evolution uses Bayesian model selection and stochastic sampling schemes [[15]](#br0150), [[62]](#br0620), [[63]](#br0630), [[64]](#br0640) to preserve the Markov blankets that underlie speciation at evolutionary timescales.

The notion of Markov blankets allows us to define a formal ontology of living systems. Markov blankets are nested within Markov blankets, over spatial and temporal scales. This suggests that there has to be an internal (scale-free or scale-invariant) consistency, in the sense that the variational free energy associated with a global Markov blanket (e.g., a species) has to conform to the same principles as all of its constituent Markov blankets (e.g., phenotypes), which applies recursively right down to the level of biological macromolecules. In this vein, the FEP has recently been formulated using the resources of gauge theory [[65]](#br0650); see also the treatment of dynamic systems in [[66]](#br0660). Gauge theory is a family of mathematical models that have been broadly applied in physics. The gauge theoretical formalism is used to define a Lagrangian, a functional that summarises the dynamics of a given system and preserves its global symmetry (see Box 4). This symmetry is broken by local forces, invoking a gauge field that restores the system's symmetry by compensating for these local perturbations. The FEP has been proposed as the Lagrangian of a gauge theory for living systems [[65]](#br0650). Over any given time scale, free energy is minimised across every spatial scale, while local dynamics at each of these scales—determined by local Markov blanket features—perturb the Lagrangian. However, these perturbations are then compensated for by one or more gauge fields, which are introduced when an organism either changes its internal (e.g., perceptual) states or acts upon the world to minimise surprise. The upshot of this is that it allows us to computationally model scale-invariant free energy minimisation dynamics across temporal and spatial scales. As we ascend nested Markov blankets, and as we consider different biological systems, free energy is minimised in dynamically equivalent, but mechanistically heterogeneous, ways.

This brings us to a meta-theoretical ontology of biological systems derived from the FEP—variational neuroethology—that can be used to explain and predict how living systems, at any spatial and temporal scale, instantiate the dynamics of adaptive free energy minimisation. The precise nature of free energy minimising mechanisms will vary from organism to organism and species to species, as a function of their evolved phenotypes and biobehavioural patterns. In other words, the FEP supplies a universal Lagrangian that extends across all spatial and temporal scales, but the particular ways in which it is implemented will vary according to the species, organisms, and scales under scrutiny. This allows us to computationally model the regions of the phase space populated by different organisms—along its diagonal—that realise equivalent classes of dynamics, and to recast the issue of ecological problem-solving as the problem of finding local free energy minima. At first glance, analysing such complex dynamics across time and space might seem intractable, but conveniently, biologists have long been familiar with a highly compatible framework that allows us to translate our variational neuroethology into viable scientific practice.

[Go to:](# "Go to other sections in this page")
