# Introduction

Back when I was in school, in my social studies class, I learned that prior to the invention of money, people had to barter for everything they needed from anyone else. In a barter system, value is determined by negotiation and mutualnagreement, not market price. So people negotiate with each other to trade goods and services they can offer with goods and services they desire.

So for example, let’s say I have baskets pon baskets of mangoes and I’m tryna get rid of them because I prefer pineapples. And let’s say one of my neighbours, we’ll
call them Patsy, has a goat and my other neighbour, Boyo, has a field of pineapples. Boyo doh like mangoes, but he does want a goat for a goat race, and Patsy tired taking care of this goat, so she ready to give away the goat in exchange for some mangoes. Easy solution, I give Patsy my mangoes, I get Patsy’s goat, and I give Patsy’s goat to Boyo in exchange for his pineapples. That’s the ideal barter system scenario, but it gets messy the moment you introduce more than one trade scenario into the equation. What if Boyo didn’t want the goat, what if he wanted a cow? What if Patsy was allergic to mangoes? What if none of my neighbours had pineapples and my mangoes just rotted away cuz I couldn’t trade them for anything I wanted? 

That tricky scenario is known as the double [[coincidence of wants problem]], which is when two parties each have a good or service that the other party wants, but they are unable to trade because they each desire something different from what the other has to offer. It arises fairly frequently within barter systems because you can’t always find someone who’s willing to trade what you have for  what you want. In my social studies textbook, the double coincidence of wants problem was used to explain why people shifted from the barter system to the monetary system. [[Study Questions/202308182351_Barter_Myth/money]] being the solution as it serves as a standardised medium of exchange. But what if I told you that isn’t what happened? Let’s dive right into the debate on the origins of money, the reality of pre-money exchange, the actual uses of barter through history, and how all of this has affected our imagination of the present and the future. 