---
id: "1689350086-stablecoin"
aliases:
  - "stablecoin"
tags: []
---
[[project-directory]]


# stablecoin

## USDCT

-- Control fiscal policy by popular vote
-- Params: 
  - Rate of inflation to LPs
  - Tax Rate
  - Tax allocation
-
- How? 
- Use chainlink functions to query the result of snapshot votes of a fairly distributed stablecoin.
- How to distribute and avoid picking winners and losers.... followers? vote???
- Raise funds -> Launch LPs
-
- Operational ideas
- 1) Scaffold based simple website
-   Dashboard with metrics (informed electorate

<h1>Bullshit Summary for you TL;DR'ers</h1>

SO!

The Future of Finance. The Future of Tech. The Future of Monetary Policy. 

SHOW ME WHAT YOU GOT, CT!!!! 

Vote-backed stablecoin made possible using Chainlink Functions with Snapshot.org, and a lil' bit of erc20 black magic. 

The experiment is simple; could Crypto Twitter collectively do a better job managing the economic/financial policy of just one token?

Every week, you'll get a token-weighted vote on inflation and taxation, the two main levers every Fed Chairmen has to pull to keep their respective economies going. As a collective, will you be able to preserve your value?
 
<h1>Research</h1>

There are many stablecoins, employing various methods, to accomplish the same goal of establishing a reliable primative which would serve the rather tumlutious cryptocurrency markets. There are three main paths to take, or that have been taken so far: 

**-USD-Backed.** Using third-party audits to verify the 1-to-1 ratio, companies like USDC and USDT have issued tokens onchain guranteeing their redeemability for actual US Dollars and so far have been successful. The are intermittant times where users doubt the audits credibility, however all the audits come back positively. 
**-Algorithmic.** UST and Amplforth would be the most notable algorithmic stablecoins in recent history. Using preset economic rules they expand and contract supply based on demand or use algo's to keep the price stable or in-range using other means.
**-Counter Party.** Not exactly sure how to define this one other than Counter Party. It's the DAI/MKR system which focus's on the supply of DAI, the demand fo MKR to close DAI loans, etc etc. 

One could also argue that the past two years brought out a new type of pseudo stable coins via Reserve Backed Currencies, which ironically ended up being highly speculative. These kind of currencies consisted of Olympus DAO (OHM),  and forks of OHM accross many chains (notable projects: MAGIC and ORKAN). Those currencies actually worked quite similar to (any) soverign nations Federal Reserve in the sense that the Reserve Token's price was derived from a treasury, and that tresury spread it's risk in a mutual-fund-esque style consisting of blue chip currencies, dollar backed stables, and various other allocations that supported either the hosting chain of the OHM fork or particular token's the DAO voted to include. Though they ended up being shitcoin-style speculated upon, the protocols themselves, and their underlying smart contracts were actually quite complex and functioned quite well and as intended. 

The stablecoin "primitive" issue still continues to allude the cryptocurrency ecosystem. Even the USD-backed coins with audited holdings still come with certain strings attached, like their centralized ownership via large corporate backings.(They're also dependent on federal reserve economic policy) Should regulations change suddenly the impact would be substantial on integral cryptocurrency projects, and quite a few Uniswap v2 and v3 positions accross chains. 

## USDCT
United 
States -> Super
Dollar
Crypto -> Collective
Twitter ->Treasury?
???

So what is different about USDCT? Since EthDenver '23, Chainlink launched the beta of an extention of their oracle services called Chainlink Functions. 

Chainlink functions enable developers to attach arbitrary JS scripts to oracle executions, greatly extending what they can verify through trustless computation.Oracles run the javascript in the Function's smart contract, reach a consensus, and deliver the consensus back to your smart contract where the data is stored. The importance here is that you can then call that stored data to do events/functions on the Consumer smartcontract such as an offchain vote system with an API like Snapshot.org. This allows lines of javascript to be run via oracles and returned to a smartcontract, effectively bridging Web2 APIs and Web3 smartcontract events. By allowing the oracle to trustlessly write on_chain the result of their deployed logic Smartcontracts can now call Web2 APIs and verify the hex returns / uint decoded returns to the smartcontract in a way that is trustless and verifiable. 

## Reducing the friction of governance.

Talking points: 
- On chain governance is high friction
- Snapshot votes have little accountability
- CHainlink functions enable the best of both worlds


Snaphots, voting mechanisms, and other DAO-based systems historically have always been specifically tailored, and honestly, at the whim of the protocol team as to whether or not to execute the voted-outcome. The proposed system that USDCT is building is automatic transaction for a voted-outcome. 

First, the desired outcome is using the Chainlink Functions contract (FunctionsConsumer.sol), to query the offchain vote at Snapshot.org. The two proposed votes will be the two levers described in the summary, whether to increase/decrease taxes, or increase/decrease total token supply. With these two economic tools you can, in theory, control the "Speed" of the token--the goal being to preserve the collective value for as long as possible in a volitile crypto marketplace.

The secondary desired outcome is to after reading the offchain vote via Functions, have the token contract mint more tokens and add them single sidedly to the UniswapV3 (or potentially v4) contract automatically based on the result. Conversly, if the outcome of the vote is to decrease the supply, then it would remove single-sidedly the USDCT token and transfer to burn address, effectively lowering the tradable supply.

The same results and intents would be made for the adjusting of contract taxes. If the token holders collectively vote for 0% taxes, the contract would run the internal functions after receiving the outcome via the Chainlink Functions contract, and change the taxes based on the results. Likewise for an increase in taxes. 

The build will be a custom smart contract and verified for public view. The ICO we are looking to raise for this test is 10 ETH, all of which would be put into the Liquidity Pool(???). 


<h1>Conclusion</h1>

This experiement has interesting implications in the outcome. One it gives perfect control over to the "arm chair" experts of crypto twitter/the cryptocurrency ecosystem users. The name of the token, yes, is on the nose a bit in teasing this idea, but in truth, there are actually a lot of experienced and economically knowledable cryptocurrency users around and active. The  
